#summary FAQ
#labels Featured,Phase-Requirements,Phase-Implementation

= Introduction =

This is the current home of the SBML Discrete Stochastic Model Test Suite. It consists of two versions. One consists of SBML Level 2, version 1 models, and the other Level 2, version 3. They are both designed with discrete stochastic simulation in mind, and are packaged together with "correct" output corresponding to those models. There should also be enough documentation to allow most people to be able to figure out how to use it all.

=== FAQ ===

*Question:* How do you test a stochastic simulator?

*Answer:* With difficulty! ;-) By their very nature, stochastic simulators generate stochastic output, so there is no way to test a simulator on the basis of a single run. The only sensible way to test a stochastic simulator is to run it many times (with different seeds or independent streams) and check that the distribution of the output generated is consistent with the "true" distribution of responses. In the test suite, we focus on the mean and standard deviation of the output at a collection of time points in order to be able to check that certain aspects of the output are correct.

*Question:* How can I get started with using the test suite?

*Answer:* Start by reading the user guide which begins with a discussion of testing stochastic simulators so that you understand the basic idea. The last section describes the models in the test suite, which should give an idea of what is and isn't covered. Then download and unpack the zip file (into a new, empty directory) containing the suite itself. You will need to write some code to implement the tests for your simulator, but some example code is available (see below).

*Question:* How do you know your results are correct?

*Answer:* We don't for sure, but our results are not derived from running a "correct simulator". They are computed directly, either analytically or numerically, from an understanding of the stochastic process represented by the humanly-constructed and interpreted SBML. The models of the form dsmts-001-?? and dsmts-002-?? have simple analytic expressions for the required means and standard deviations. The models of the form dsmts-003-?? have their results computed using numerical analysis of the rate matrix for the process. This numerical analysis could contain small rounding errors, but there is no Monte Carlo simulation error in any of our test files. We have used the test suite to test our own locally developed simulator (gillespie2), which now conforms with the test suite with the exception of a small number of models corresponding to known bugs in our simulator.

*Question:* Why are your models so simple? Why don't you have models with lots of species/reactions?

*Answer:* We restrict our attention to models which admit direct analytic or numerical analysis (see above). There are not many of these, and they are all fairly simple.

*Question:* Is there some example test code?

*Answer:* Yes - see example test code for further details.

*Question:* Where are the SBML Level 1 models?

*Answer:* There aren't any. Because SBML Level 1 doesn't have the "hasOnlySubstanceUnits" flag on the species element, there isn't really a nice way to represent discrete stochastic models correctly and unambiguously in a clean way in SBML Level 1. We recommend that people interested in discrete stochastic simulation forget about SBML Level 1 and concentrate support on SBML Level 2 and beyond.

*Question:* Where are the SBML Level 2, version 2 models?

*Answer:* There aren't any. We skipped L2,v2 and went straight to L2,v3. We only have resources to develop for the latest SBML version. Older versions will be archived on the web site, but wont be updated.

*Question:* Can I use the test suite to benchmark the speed of stochastic simulators?

*Answer:* This isn't a good idea, as all of the models in the test suite are very simple, with very few species/reactions. However, many of the more sophisticated stochastic simulation algorithms are specifically tailored to coping well with models with many species/reactions (which are typical of more realistic/interesting models).

*Question:* Can I use the test suite to test approximate/hybrid stochastic simulators?

Answer: Yes, but approximate simulators will obviously fail the standard tests. The user guide contains some general advice.

*Question:* Who has developed this test suite?

*Answer:* The test suite has been developed by Tom Evans (t.w.evans@liverpool.ac.uk), Darren Wilkinson (d.j.wilkinson@ncl.ac.uk) and Colin Gillespie (c.gillespie@ncl.ac.uk).

*Question:* Is this test-suite official or endorsed by the SBML community in any way?

*Answer:* The short answer is "No."! However, we do know that the suite is used by several groups of SBML developers, and is the only available SBML test suite for stochastic simulators. We hope to refine the suite in the light of comments from the SBML community and then try to get it endorsed or adopted by the SBML team in due course. The resource is (and will always be) free.

*Question:* How do I cite the test suite in papers I write?

*Answer:* T. W. Evans, C. S. Gillespie, D. J. Wilkinson (2008) The SBML discrete stochastic models test suite, Bioinformatics, published on-line, doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btm566. 